docs: explain cpu masking and migration behavior (#429)
xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org: docs/guides/cpu-masking.md

> # CPU Masking

Reviewer: I don't think "masking" is the word we want to use here (note that it's the word used by the user asking the question on the forum, not anyone else):

1. There is another meaning to "cpu masks" - hard/soft affinity, where one sets which cores will vcpus be able to use. I'd rather keep the "mask" meaning for this usage.
2. The new way of doing "CPU masking" is called "CPU feature levelling" - because xen/xapi automatically calculate a level that will better serve a particular purpose, it's not about manually "masking" something out anymore.

If "CPU masking" is a term of art in VMWare/Proxmox world, then I guess this could be useful to note somewhere, and how we (potentially) differ from their approach.

## Introduction

This guide explains how CPU masking works in XCP-ng and its impact on virtual machine migration, particularly in environments with mixed CPU architectures or generations. 

> The goal is to help you understand why some migrations succeed while others fail, what compatibility guarantees XCP-ng provides at the pool level, and how to safely migrate your VMs during hardware upgrades. This applies whether you're moving across different CPU vendors or between generations of the same vendor.

Reviewer 2: > The goal is to help you understand why some migrations succeed while others fail

I haven't found information about this in the document. The way it's written, I got information about what migrations are allowed, and some arent. However there may be scenarios where migrations actually fail due to CPU masking issues. If that's the case, they should be detailed.

## Definitions

CPU masking is **how XCP-ng controls which CPU features are visible to virtual machines**.

Since modern CPUs offer a wide range of features — and not all hosts in a pool support the same set — exposing unsupported features could make live migration unsafe. Without masking, a VM might end up on a host that lacks the CPU capabilities it requires, leading to crashes or unpredictable behavior.

To prevent this, XCP-ng uses Xen to present each VM with a consistent, safe set of CPU features. From the VM's perspective, the CPU appears virtualized (it may not perfectly match the host's physical CPU). Certain features are hidden (or *masked*) to ensure compatibility across all hosts in the pool.

> CPU masking isn’t about performance. **It’s a safety mechanism**. Its primary role is to enable smooth migration while preventing guest crashes or unpredictable behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CPU masking isn't about performance. **It's a safety mechanism**. Its primary role is to enable smooth migration while preventing guest crashes or unpredictable behavior.
```

We don't use this kind of quotes, right? There may be more in the document.

## When CPU Masking is Applied

A CPU mask is applied when a VM starts, not while it's running. This means the VM's CPU features are locked in at boot and remain fixed throughout its uptime, even during live migration.

:::tip
Because of this, **CPU masking can't be adjusted on the fly**. Removing features from a running VM would almost certainly cause it to crash. 

> Even a simple reboot won’t update the CPU features if the VM’s state is preserved. To apply any changes, you must fully shut down the VM and restart it.

Reviewer 2: At this stage of the document, I don't understand why this mention is relevant. As a reader, I'm wondering "why would I want to change the CPU features of the running VM? Is that even possible?"

:::

## Pool-level Masking

> In XCP-ng, **CPU masking works at the pool level**. The pool exposes a shared set of CPU features — the lowest common denominator across all hosts.

Reviewer 2: I, and several other developers, tend to avoid the `—` character in technical markdown documents. I know they're correct, but they more and more scream "I used AI to write or reword my document", and that's not a message we want to sent in our technical docs.

When a new host joins the pool, its CPU features are compared against those of existing members:

- If the new host has a **newer CPU**, its extra features are masked to align with the pool level.

> - If the new host has an **older CPU**, the pool level drops, and some features are masked for all hosts in the pool.

Reviewer 2: This is where I expected what I think is the most important thing to know about CPU masking. I actually thought that it was the point of the document, at first (the rest being transparent and not supposed to cause any issues).

When the CPU features of an existing pool are reduced, running VMs are still using the previous set of CPU flags. Which means that we now have a host in the pool that is not suitable for receiving the running VMs during a live migration.

CCing @xcp-ng/xapi-network so that they can confirm what the actual behaviour is when attempting to migrate a previously running VM just after the pool CPU features are reduced by adding an older host to it.

AFAIK, the VM crashes. But maybe XAPI is smart and refuses to migrate to the new pool member until the features the VM was started with are reduced (by stopping and restarting the VM).

By default, VMs started in the pool automatically use the pool-level CPU feature set. This ensures that, from the moment they boot, they can migrate to any host in the pool, without no manual CPU configuration. The approach balances safety and performance while keeping pool management straightforward.

## Live Migration Behavior

> Live migration checks rely on the CPU features the VM was assigned at boot. Before migration, XCP-ng confirms the destination host supports all the VM’s required features. If even one is missing, the migration is blocked.

Reviewer 2: A cross pool migration should be blocked before it is even attempted. But I think some intra-pool migrations can fail (see my comment just above).
